<p>
	<meta content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1" http-equiv="Content-Type" />
</p>
<script type="text/javascript" id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
</script>
<p>
	<title></title>
</p>
<p>
	<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" />
</p>

<style>
<-- html {
    background-color: #D4D4D4;
}


body {  
    margin: 0.4em 5% 0.4em 5%;
    padding: 0.8em 1em 0.8em 1em;
    background-color: white;
    color: #11111A;
    font-family: Helvetica, "Trebuchet MS", Arial, sans-serif;
    font-size: 15.2px; /* setting base font to user's prefered size */
    line-height: 130%;
    border: 1px solid black;
    border-radius: 15px;
} -->

html, body {
    margin: 0;
    padding: 0;
    background: #D4D4D4;
}

#container {
    width: 90%;
    max-width: 1200px;
    margin: 20px auto;
    padding: 1em;
    background: white;
    border: 1px solid black;
    border-radius: 15px;
}

C'est la manière classique de faire : le fond gris appartient à la page entière, et le contenu est dans un "cartouche"

td {padding-bottom:5px;}

hr {
    width: 80%;
    margin-top: 1em;
    margin-bottom: 1.3em;
}

td.numero {
width:25px;
vertical-align: top;
padding-right:5px;
text-align:right;
}

#cpt {
    width: 100px;
    height: 84px;
    margin: auto;
    
}



details.abstract-box {
	margin: 8px 0 18px 0;
	border: 1px solid #ddd;
	border-radius: 6px;
	padding: 6px 12px;
	background: #fafafa;
}

details.abstract-box summary {
	cursor: pointer;
	font-weight: bold;
	color: #2a5db0;
	padding: 6px 0;
	outline: none;
	list-style: none; 
}

details.abstract-box summary::-webkit-details-marker {
	display: none;
}

details.abstract-box summary::before {
	content: "▶";
	display: inline-block;
        margin-right: 8px;
	transition: transform 0.2s ease;
}

details.abstract-box[open] summary::before {
	transform: rotate(90deg);
}

details.abstract-box .abstract-content {
	padding: 6px 4px 4px 4px;
}
</style>

<body>

<div id="container">

<h2>
	Romain Aimino</h2>
<div id="presentation">
	Associate member of the <a href="https://cmup.pt/">Centre of Mathematics of the University of Porto</a>.<br />

	<br />
	<address>
		Departamento de Matem&aacute;tica<br />
		Faculdade de Ci&ecirc;ncias da Universidade do Porto<br />
		Rua do Campo Alegre, 687<br />
		4169-007 Porto<br />
		PORTUGAL</address>
	<address>
		<strong>E-mail:</strong> romain.aimino &quot;at&quot; fc.up.pt</address>
</div>
<div id="logos">
	&nbsp;</div>
<h3>
	Research articles:</h3>
<ol>
<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Distributional results for the shortest distance between trajectories of different dynamics</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-MAo5SekQpfS5keRunWIyzuYQ1UTewHz/view?usp=drive_link">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, T. Caby, J. M. Freitas, D. S. Pinho, submitted for publication, (2026)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    We establish Extreme Value Distributions for the closest encounter
between trajectories generated by different maps defined in the same
reference phase space. For a class of strongly mixing maps, we show
that the limit distribution depends on the
length of the different trajectories and the co-dimension of the
associated invariant measures. It is also modulated by an Extremal
Index, that informs on the tendency of nearby points to diverge along
with the evolution of their respective dynamics, serving as an indicator of their compatibility. We give a formula
for this quantity for a class of chaotic maps of the interval and for
the co-dimension in the case when the respective measures admit
densities with isolated zeros and singularities. We present diverse
examples of systems satisfying these assumptions and compute the
different parameters modulating the limit distribution.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Multivariate extreme values for dynamical systems</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1pdgUSo8ki-Wyos7fbYwSSixdug6iFvVO/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, A. C. M. Freitas, J. M. Freitas, M. Todd, <em>Nonlinearity</em>, <b>39 (1)</b>, 015023, (2026), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1361-6544/ae36db">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
   We establish a theory for multivariate extreme value analysis of dynamical systems. Namely, we provide conditions adapted to the dynamical setting which enable the study of dependence between extreme values of the components of \(\mathbb{R}^d\)-valued observables evaluated along the orbits of the systems. We study this cross-sectional dependence, which results from the combination of a spatial and a temporal dependence structures. We give several illustrative applications, where concrete systems and dependence sources are introduced and analysed.

    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Stable laws for random dynamical systems</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1MwfqKmqy4pWp_sWMMEhv6Xsh3dqXWr-Y/view?usp=sharing.pdf">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, M. Nicol, A. T&ouml;r&ouml;k, <em>Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems</em>, <b>44 (11)</b>, 3041-3090, (2024), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/etds.2024.5">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    In this paper we consider random dynamical systems formed by
  concatenating maps acting on the unit interval \([0,1]\) in an iid fashion.
  Considered as a stationary Markov process, the random dynamical system
  possesses a unique stationary measure \(\nu\). We consider a class of
  non square-integrable observables \(\phi\), mostly of form
  \(\phi(x)=d(x,x_0)^{-\frac{1}{\alpha}}\) where \(x_0\) is non-periodic point
  satisfying some other genericity conditions, and more generally regularly
  varying observables with index \(\alpha \in (0,2)\). The two types of maps we concatenate are a
  class of piecewise \(C^2\) expanding maps, and a class of intermittent maps
  possessing an indifferent fixed point at the origin. Under conditions on
  the dynamics and \(\alpha\) we establish Poisson limit laws, convergence of
  scaled Birkhoff sums to a stable limit law and functional stable limit
  laws, in both the annealed and quenched case. The scaling constants for
  the limit laws for almost every quenched realization are the same as
  those of the annealed case and determined by \(\nu\). This is in contrast
  to the scalings in quenched central limit theorems where the centering
  constants depend in a critical way upon the realization and are not the
  same for almost every realization.

    </p>
</details>
	</li>
<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Statistical properties of the Rauzy-Veech-Zorich map</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1jgb7iR89qxT0v7UdyeRrkDORFRA6C2uG/view?usp=sharing.pdf">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, M. Pollicott, <em>Thermodynamic Formalism, Lectures Notes in Mathematics, CIRM Jean-Morlet subseries</em>, <b>2290</b>, 317-349, Pollicott M., Vaienti S. (eds.), Springer, Cham., (2021), (<a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74863-0_10">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
   In this note we survey some very basic statistical properties of the Rauzy-Veech map and the Zorich acceleration. Our aim is to give a particularly thermodynamic perspective of well known results.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Deterministic walks in random environment</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1kJ5SXTQx416HzV4AjIsbzyM8I7SgnkMl/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, C. Liverani, <em>Annals of Probability</em>, <b>48 (5)</b>, 2212-2257, (2020), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/19-AOP1421">link</a>)</p>
<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    Motivated by the random Lorentz gas, we study deterministic walks in random environment and show that (in simple, yet relevant, cases) they can be reduced to a class of random walks in random environment where the jump probability depends (weakly) on the past. In addition, we prove few basic results (hopefully the germ of a general theory) on the latter, purely probabilistic, model.
    </p>
</details>
			</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Large deviations for dynamical systems with stretched exponential decay of correlations</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1wH8b8mLfp2JPiutG3kdOu5CBNbopHfS7/view?usp=sharing.pdf">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, J. M. Freitas, <em>Portugaliae Mathematica</em>, <b>76 (2)</b>, 143-152, (2019), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.4171/PM/2030">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    We  obtain  large  deviations  estimates  for  systems  with  stretched  exponential decay of correlations,  which improve the ones previously obtained in the literature.  As a consequence we obtain better large deviations estimates for Viana maps and get large deviations estimates for a class of intermittent maps with stretched exponential loss of memory.
    </p>
</details>
		</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Recurrence statistics for the space of Interval Exchange maps and the Teichm&uuml;ller flow on the space of translation surfaces</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1K2U23_VawjaSQzbFx-kppqM-WLlj71Pi/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, M. Nicol, M. Todd, <em>Annales de l&#39;Institut Henri Poincar&eacute; (B) Probabilit&eacute;s et Statistiques</em>, <b>53 (3)</b>, 1371-1401, (2017), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/16-AIHP758">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
   In this note we show that the transfer operator of a Rauzy-Veech-Zorich renormalization map acting on a space of quasi-H&ouml;lder functions is quasicompact and derive certain statistical recurrence properties for this map and its associated Teichm&uuml;ller flow. We establish Borel-Cantelli lemmas, Extreme Value statistics and return time statistics for the map and flow. Previous results have established quasicompactness in H&ouml;lder or analytic function spaces, for example the work of M. Pollicott and T. Morita. The quasi-H&ouml;lder function space is particularly useful for investigating return time statistics. In particular we establish the shrinking target property for nested balls in the setting of Teichm&uuml;ller flow. Our point of view, approach and terminology derives from the work of M. Pollicott augmented by that of M. Viana.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>On the quenched central limit theorem for random dynamical systems</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1BCJtIthXzmJVfkPko68_pESxfZaj5UN2/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			M. Abdelkader, R. Aimino, <em>Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical</em>, <b>49 (24)</b>, 13pp, (2016), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1751-8113/49/24/244002">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    We provide a necessary and sufficient condition under which the quenched central limit theorem without random centering holds for one-dimensional random systems that are uniformly expanding. This condition holds in particular when all the maps preserve a common measure. We also give a counter example which shows that this condition is not necessarily satisfied when the maps do not preserve a common measure.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Concentration inequalities for sequential dynamical systems of the unit interval</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1owPpIE_l1Dv8uSv1fAFNFvKAjqqf2uQe/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, J. Rousseau, <em>Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems</em>, <b>36 (8)</b>, 2384-2407, (2016), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/etds.2015.19">link</a>)</p>
		<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
     We prove a concentration inequality for sequential dynamical systems of the unit interval enjoying an exponential loss of memory in the BV norm, and we investigate several of its consequences. In particular, this covers compositions of \(\beta\)-transformations, with all \(\beta\) lying in a neighborhood of a fixed \(\beta_\star > 1\) and systems satisfying a covering type assumption.
    </p>
</details>

	</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Polynomial loss of memory for maps of the interval with a neutral fixed point</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Ri-J_G7zPEIAajqzNICEzG4SHWKLXeoB/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, H. Hu, M. Nicol, A. T&ouml;r&ouml;k, S. Vaienti, <em>Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems -A</em>, <b>35 (3)</b>, 793-806, (2015), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.3934/dcds.2015.35.793">link</a>)</p>
<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    We give an example of a sequential dynamical system consisting of intermittent-type maps which exhibits loss of memory with a polynomial rate of decay. A uniform bound holds for the upper rate of memory loss. The maps may be chosen in any sequence, and the bound holds for all compositions.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Annealed and quenched limit theorems for random expanding dynamical systems</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/18xibJ-0HlKJpOu49BJlo_0_7FXBNIU-K/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, M. Nicol, S. Vaienti, <em>Probability Theory and Related Fields</em>, <b>162 (1)</b>, 233-274, (2015), (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00440-014-0571-y">link</a>)</p>

<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    In this paper, we investigate annealed and quenched limit theorems for random expanding dynamical systems. Making use of functional analytic techniques and more probabilistic arguments with martingales, we prove annealed versions of a central limit theorem, a large deviation principle, a local limit theorem, and an almost sure invariance principle. We also discuss the quenched central limit theorem, dynamical Borel-Cantelli lemmas, Erd&ouml;s-R&eacute;nyi laws and concentration inequalities.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>A note on the large deviations for piecewise expanding multidimensional maps</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1cavHQMAJzLxQEzCR5p_099N5PpWp9F1s/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, S. Vaienti, <em>Nonlinear Dynamics, New Directions: Theoretical Aspects</em>, Nonlinear Systems and Complexity, <b>11</b>, Gonz&aacute;lez-Aguilar, H. and Ugalde, E (eds.), New York, Springer. 2015, (<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09867-8_1">link</a>)</p>
<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
   We provide the large deviation principle for some systems admitting a spectral gap, by using the functional approach of Hennion and Herv&eacute;, slightly modified. Our main application concerns multidimensional expanding maps introduced by Saussol.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
</ol>
<h3>
	Others:</h3>
<ol>
	<li>
		<p align="justify">
			<b>Vitesse de m&eacute;lange et th&eacute;or&egrave;mes limites pour les syst&egrave;mes dynamiques al&eacute;atoires et non-autonomes</b>, (<a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1UsFJ6YeCzeTKujamnsEqv8IbWuToH1AW/view?usp=sharing">.pdf</a>)<br />
			R. Aimino, Th&egrave;se de doctorat, Universit&eacute; de Toulon, (2014)</p>
<details class="abstract-box">
    <summary>Abstract</summary>
    <p align="justify" class="abstract-content">
    Dans cette th&egrave;se, nous nous int&eacute;ressons aux propri&eacute;t&eacute;s statistiques des syst&egrave;mes dynamiques al&eacute;atoires et non-autonomes. Dans le premier chapitre, consacr&eacute; aux syst&egrave;mes al&eacute;atoires, nous &eacute;tablissons un cadre fonctionnel abstrait, couvrant une large classe de syst&egrave;mes dilatants en dimension 1 et sup&eacute;rieure, permettant de d&eacute;montrer de nombreux th&eacute;or&egrave;mes limites annealed. Nous donnons aussi une condition n&eacute;cessaire et suffisante pour que la version quenched du th&eacute;or&egrave;me de la limite centrale soit valide en dimension 1. Dans le chapitre deux, apr&egrave;s avoir introduit la notion de syst&egrave;me non-autonome, nous &eacute;tudions un syst&egrave;me compos&eacute; d&rsquo;applications en dimension 1 ayant un point fixe neutre commun, et nous montrons que celui-ci admet une vitesse de perte de m&eacute;moire polynomiale. Le chapitre trois est consacr&eacute; aux in&eacute;galit&eacute;s de concentration. Nous &eacute;tablissons de telles in&eacute;galit&eacute;s pour des syst&egrave;mes dynamiques al&eacute;atoires et non-autonomes, et nous &eacute;tudions diverses applications. Dans le chapitre quatre, nous nous int&eacute;ressons aux lemmes dynamiques de Borel-Cantelli pour l&rsquo;induction de Rauzy-Veech-Zorich, et pr&eacute;sentons quelques r&eacute;sultats li&eacute;s aux statistiques de r&eacute;currence pour cette application.
    </p>
</details>
		
	</li>
</ol>

</div>

</body>
